And as I say, my mission was we had to get that
archaic system that they had turned into an
automated system. So having spent numerous hours
in talking with Mr. Heaton about that, he said,
well, look, I think what we need to do is create a new
position. and make you coordinator of our data
processing operation. So in 1967, well, they
created that position and gave me that
responsibility and hired a new assistant
registrar and replaced me in the record section.
So I went to work then on further automating the
record system. And I wanted to do something about
the registration system. I wanted to get it where
it wasn't such a chore for a student. And I go back to
my student day passport. I used to say on that
campus as a student, I can well remember, I had no
idea at the time I'd ever be in that position, but I
used to say two things if I ever had any authority
around this institution up here that I would like
to correct. One of them was our registration
system and the other was the fiscal office. I it was
just in any student of the era that I'm talking
about would certainly agree with me because we
just again I think it was just people who have been
there and been there and they were not willing to
change with the times and with all of the wonderful
opportunities that we had with the computer aid
being initiated in. So we began to look at
improving the registration system, although we
had to do it on the card system. We then started
going to a pre-registration system whereby a
student would come in and visit with a counselor.
And I also felt very strongly about every student
should have a counselor in the academic area that
knew about the program that they were pursuing and
could sit down with them and have some valuable
time and some counseling from the faculty
members. So Mr. Runner went along with that and
they put in academic counselors who were
professors or who were members of the faculty in
departments and we began building this the system
that a student had at a contact point and that could
start leading them toward a degree plan and that
sort of thing. So we developed the
pre-registration system at that time and started
it on the freshmen who were coming in in the
summertime to try it out and then later passed it on
to the entire student body. Of course, that lasted
for a while and then we felt like it needed to be
upgraded even more and then went to another level.
I wanted, one of the things I wanted to do in my
career there was to make registration absolutely
as easy as it could be made. And that later came true
when I got in and got the touchstone registration
system put in. After I did that, I truly felt that my
mission was completed. All right now, so The first
major changes came in the late 60s? Late 60s, early
70s, yeah, that's right. And was it still key punch
cards? It was still key punch because they had no,
we had no terminals or anything at that time. All
the data input was done by key punch cards and the
student would go and register and then all this
data would have to be taken to the computer center
and key punch operators would punch this data in
and build the student file and generate a sketch.
All right, let's see. Mr. Heaton serves till when?
Mr. Heaton serves until 1972. And Ed Cooper, this
was under the Williams administration. And Ed
Cooper, who had been, as you well know, an
assistant to Dr. Williams in the President's
office for some years prior to that, was named our
first Dean of Admissions and Records in 1972.
Well, I left a little bit of a gap. After 1967,
In serving in this coordinator of data
processing, I served in that for two years. And one
day Mr. Heaton called me in in 69, and I'm mistaken.
I need to stand corrected on what I said about
Cooper's title. Mr. Heaton called me in in early
69, and he said that Mr. Rudder had talked with him
and they were going to restructure the office. And
they made Mr. Heaton the first dean of admissions
and records. I've been corrected in what I said if I
could be. And they were going to make me registrar.
So I became registrar in February of 1969. And
Heaton was the dean of admissions and records. All
right. Did your responsibilities change with the
title change? I had more responsibility, of
course. At that time, what did they do? We started
fanning out and increasing our staff because the
enrollment was growing. My job entailed, of
course, the supervision of all of the student
academic records, the residency, the assignment
of classroom space. One of the things that I
insisted on when Mr. Rudder wanted me to become
registrar, and I had to talk to him about it.
Classroom space on the campus belonged, at least
every department head thought, because they were
in academic building, that they should teach all
their classes in the academic building. You've
been through some of this. And it was almost
impossible to get any kind of respectable
classroom utilization. And so one of the things
that I saw that one had to do to centralize that
function, and if we were going to be responsible
for it, then we needed to have the authority to
assign. So one of the things that I said to the
president was that I want to guarantee that the
classroom space will be given, hopefully, to the
registrar. And that we will have total authority
to assign the space. And he agreed to do that. And it
made a lot of the faculty unhappy because they had
to walk across campus to a class. But our classroom
utilization rose to the level of the best in the
state, according to the coordinators. Can you
think of some anecdotes that exemplify some of the
complaints? Well, yeah, one that comes to mind
immediately was, and we got ribbed for it for
years, and I'm sorry I can't remember the
department head that just happened then, but he
was one that was very much opposed to leaving his
building. we have the authority to do it, well, we
made an assignment for him to teach a class, and it
just so turned out that we scheduled him in the
men's restroom. In his building. In his building,
and you can imagine the fun he had with that, and it
lasted for a long, long time. As a matter of fact, I
think that was Dr. Clifford Sumane of the Capitol
Engineering, I believe. No, I'm Sumane. No, I'm
Sumane. That's correct. But... There was a lot of
complaining, but actually, I mean, they
complained mainly because it was the
inconvenience. All of them knew in their hearts
that the only way to have it done and have it done for
it would be a good management tool was if somebody
had to say, look, I have this room vacant over here.
It's just the size you need. I'm sorry you don't
have to walk across the way here to go to it. But they
knew in there. I remember too, don't I, some
complaints about faculty members not wanting a
class except at the hour convenient to them.
That's correct. That's correct. And most of them
wanted those from 8 to 12. That's right. And so that
we expanded today. The excellent point, I'd
forgotten about that. And most of them were on
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday from 8 to 12. And so
obviously one could see that that was not helping
our utilization. So we spread the day out and also
started the Tuesday, Thursday hour and a half
classes. Do you remember how that change came
about? The Tuesday, Thursday? Yeah, we dropped
the Saturday. It was in the mid-60s. Yeah, yeah.
Was it the mid-60s? Somewhere in the 60s, because
Randy Mattson came as a prospective student,
brought up here by Jack Knox and John Lindsey, and
it was on a Saturday, and he wanted to meet some
faculty members, and it was the first year we
didn't have Saturday classes. And they brought
him over to Nagel Hall because Lindsey knew there
were usually some history faculty over there
hanging around. And that's where I met him.
Garland Bayless was there. And Randy and I still
remember that Saturday. I think it was 64 or 5, but
I'm not sure. It seems to me, I think it might have
been after that, later than that. Maybe not too
much later, because it happened after I came over
there. I don't remember any complaints, do you? No
complaints, no. And reason was that the students
and the faculty both didn't have to look for
Saturday in class or Saturday in form. So I think
everybody was very happy with it. But the
expanding of the day, the faculty member that
wanted it at 8 o'clock in the morning now may be
having to teach it at 2 in the afternoon. That took a
while for that to soak in or to get acceptance. All
right, let's go back now. Cooper takes over in 72.
What
was the search process, as far as you know? I don't
think there was a search process. Did anybody
contact you or anybody else? No, no. Dr.
Williams...
just chose Ed Cooper to be the replacement for
Lloyd. I one day happened to have lunch with him.
And as we were going back, he asked me who I thought
could do. And I mentioned Cooper, and he quickly
let me know that a lot of other people had mentioned
Ed. He was asking who would understand the campus
student body, who would have credibility
immediately. and also who would be open in his
communications with him. And he'd already found
Ed to be that way. Now, did you know Ed well before?
Oh, I know him well, yes. Dr. Williams' choice for
Ed Cooper was an absolute excellent choice for the
reasons you just named. I mean, Ed was the job in
admissions and records that is the toughest job
from a public relations standpoint, is
admissions. Records, you don't have that much.
Most of your work in public relations relating to
records has to do with registration. It has to do
with transcripts. And that was another thing that
I wanted to improve there was an immediate
transcript service. I mean, I felt that students
were entitled to get their transcripts as quickly
as we could possibly get them out. It hinged on
getting in schools elsewhere. It hinged on
employment and things like that, and we owed them a
very vast turnaround service. And residency.
Residency was not a pleasant job at all because
everybody wanted to be classified as a resident of
Texas, simply for monetary reasons. If you well
remember, there was a significant difference
between in-state tuition and non-resident
tuition. But admissions was getting tighter and
tighter and tighter, thus making the job tougher
and tougher and tougher. You recall the time we
went through our classroom space difficulties
here, and we had to kind of curb the enrollment. And
Ed Cooper was a knack for that. Ed was not a person
that cared about any kind of controversy. He
didn't prefer that at all. But he was such a PR
person that he could sit down and assume most of the
difficulty. Share some examples of admission
stories and anecdotes. Gee. Well, again, I wasn't
directly involved with admissions that much. I
recall a lot of fun that Ed had with the old catalogs
that had some admission requirements in there
that you probably remember, and that one was that
in order to enter A&M in the earlier years, you had
to be free of infectious diseases, and I don't
think I have that all correctly. And no felony
convictions. No felony convictions, and such
things as that. One of the things that helped us
tremendously in admissions, if I recall
correctly, was that in the years in the 70s and even
up in the early 80s, If a student didn't qualify, we
had the probationary program that we could bring
them in. Ed was able to handle a lot of these cases
that way where, you know, a student might not
qualify and the parents were here and if they were
former students, you know, I can't understand why
my son or daughter can't get in school. And rather
than just say no, we had the program where, look,
I'm willing, if you'll come
here in the summertime, you might as well come at
all. The probationary program was a wonderful
program to have. Also, it said to the students,
look, we haven't denied you. If you can come here
and do the work, make a C-outreach or whatever it
is, then you have an opportunity to be a full-time
student in the fall or the semester, whichever
time you qualify. So you're saying that was a good
practice? Excellent practice. Do you have any
guesstimate as to what percentage of the
probationary admits made it? Yes, I do. About 60%
made it. Which... May not seem to be that high, but
on the other hand, they wouldn't have gotten it if
we had just had a complete denial in the beginning
and said, no, I'm sorry. Now, as our admission
requirements get stiffer and stiffer, did the
former student complaints, did they increase in
number also? Yes, they did. But it seems to me, if I
recall correctly, Haskell, we still had the
probationary program. And it still gave us an
opportunity to say to a student, hey, here it is, if
you can do it. And you see, when I left there in 1988,
prior to that time, we were still doing that. I
don't know that that's available nowadays. I
don't know exactly what they're doing. And then
also the caps have come in since then. Can you share
any examples of apparent offers of bribes to get
somebody in? Did you ever hear of any? Oh, yes. I
particularly had that. I had that face me one time
in particular. I can remember very well who was up.
a gentleman from Washington, D.C. He was a huge
contractor up there. As a matter of fact, he built
the FBI building. And he wanted his daughter into
veterinary medicine school here. And I was told,
as we worked many times, that he had, this came from
some former students, that the guy was coming and
we needed to visit with him and whatnot. And I did. I
think we even went to the country club and had
dinner and whatnot, the usual thing. And I told him
from the beginning that there was just absolutely
no way because you had to be a resident of Texas to
get in our vet college. And at the end of the
conversation, he reached in his pocket and he
said, I just need to know who to make it to and how
much. Not to me, he wasn't inferring it to me, but he
was talking more or less about making a donation to
the institution. And I said, I'm sorry, we can't.
So you would get hints along like this from time to
time. And NM being the kind of school it is, and they
wanted their son or daughter here, it happened,
yes. All right, under Ed, did any organizational
changes occur?
Let's see. You continued as the registrar? I
continued as registrar. Now, what had happened
was that we had employed a director of admissions.
As I mentioned to you earlier, when I came there in
1965, Mr. Heaton was both director of admissions
and registrar. Well, shortly after I had been
there for, I think, a year or two, a couple years or
whatever, then a director of admissions retired.
And when Ed came in, well,
I think the fellow that had been there maybe had
left, and that position was vacant.
It was vacant. We hired Bill Lay at that
time. Now where did Bill come from? Bill came from
the public schools. It seems to me that he was in
Austin, I believe. He might have been employed
in No, I don't think so. He got his PhD from the
University of Texas, but I don't think he was
employed. And this is in the early 70s? This was in
the 70s, that's right. So Cooper, you, and Lay then
are together for?
Well, let's see. 15 years? Cooper left in 86. 86,
okay. 86, and he came in 72 for 14 years. That's
correct. And y'all move out of the Koch building
over to the old Exchange Store building about
when? I think we moved, I believe we moved into the
Exchange Store building about 1976. Where did the
idea of the name for that building, new name for
that building come from? The Heaton building? I
was the architect of that. I felt like that Mr.
Heaton had served the institution well and so
there was a committee formed and we submitted it to
the Board of Regents and they approved it.
Alright. Now let's see. So you didn't work for
Rutter. No. Alright. So it's Williams. But you...
No, you... I didn't work for Williams, correct?
No, no, no, but I'm talking about during the time
they were president. Yeah, Rudder was president
when you... Rudder was president when I came, when
I started in the registrar's office in 65. Yeah,
what... And then in 70... No, from your point of
view, as a worker, as a registrar, describe Mr.
Rudder's style of leadership.
Well, Mr. Rudder's style of leadership was very
direct. And, of course, you couldn't help but
recognize a lot of that was due to his military
experience. Easy man to talk with. Easy man to get
in to see. There were times when Mr. Heaton might
not be available and he would want something and
you'd go down and talk with him. So I became very,
very well acquainted with Mr. Glutter. I liked his
style. I liked it because it was a lot like I am.
very, very direct. You always knew where he stood
type of administration and I think he had a great
amount of respect for people that were doing their
job and he recognized and he felt rather close to
it. Now, his key secretary was Nelda. Nelda Ryle.
At that time. Yes, and was she there She was there
just about the time he got there, wasn't she?
Almost all the time. She worked for Dr. Graff. She
was Dr. Graff's secretary. That's right, that's
right. And then moved in for another. That's
correct. She was Dr. Graff's secretary when I was
hired in 65. She was there in the co-chair.
Describe her manner and style. Wonderful,
pleasant, all-business lady. She was very, very
valuable to any administrator because she knew
She knew the people very well that that
administrator would have to deal with. She was a
good informant, so the administrator knew what to
expect when that person came in. She had a
tremendous amount of background on everybody.
Who were the key people that Earl Rudder most
trusted, if he needed advice? Back in those days,
Haskell, And this is just my opinion, but I always
felt that the president, particularly Mr.
Rutter, he picked, I think, in my opinion, I'm
correct, he basically handpicked his Board of
Regents. It's not the process that they go through
today. I know for a fact, because he told me from
time to time, make a list of who he wanted to be at
that time they were called board of directors and
it was just a matter of submitting that to the
governor and generally he got the people he wanted
so I would have to believe that he trusted his board
greatly and you do remember the name of the
governor during most of Mr. Rudder's presidency
that would be John B. Connolly who was a personal
friend of General Rudder And also, you're
probably aware that he was personal friends with
Lyndon Johnson, the President of the United
States, of course. I always felt, Haskell, that as
a side comment to General Rudder,
Texas A&M had General Rudder at the right time. I
had gone to school here, and our facilities were
horrible. In the classrooms, in the
laboratories, it was bad, it really was. There
were a few areas that were all right, but generally
speaking, facilities were not good at all.
General Rudder was here, and I've always thought
that his friendship with John Connolly, the
governor of Texas, and the president of the United
States, he was able, A&M was not getting their
share. for what they needed out of Austin. Our
friends at the University of Texas were way ahead
of us. And I always felt that because of that
relationship, General Rudder was able to get a lot
of the monies lined up, although he didn't get to
see all of the benefits those brought. Dr.
Williams, though, on the other hand, came in, and
he was a man that sprung this up into the high
recognition that this university received or
started to receive in the 70s. But the funds were
pouring in for what Rudder had set in place in our
buildings and our facilities all certainly
changed very quickly there. And Jack Williams was
right for A&M at the time he was here. We were
blessed with those two presidents in the town. I
agree. I feel if we reverse the order, they both
fail. They're going to flunk. Yeah. But by having
them as we did, it was just superb. All right, but
now on the staff, here on the campus, whom did Mr.
Rutter listen to? Mr. Rutter had a great amount of
trust for Fred Benson, Dean of Engineering. A
great amount of trust for him.
Help me a little bit on
business affair area. Oh, thank you. Tom Cherry.
He had a great amount. Tom was in board with Trans
World Airlines in New York, I believe, with the
Vice President. Yes, and he was able to lure Tom
here. Very, very... Mr. Rutter hired Tom? Mr.
Rutter hired Tom, and Mr. Rutter also had a great
amount of trust in Clark Diebel. He brought him
with him. He brought Diebel here. Diebel was in the
land office with General Rutter when he was in
Austin, and he trusted him very, very much. Do you
remember any... Stories, allegations of fiscal
mismanagement during those years? Under Clark
Neville? Well, under Rutter. I never heard of any.
I remember none.
Mr. Rutter had a great amount of trust in Clyde
Freeman, who he knew Clyde and the president
didn't always get along about a lot of things
sometimes, but Mr. Rutter trusted Mr. Freeman
because he knew Mr. Freeman knew the state statute
as though he had written it, and he knew he would
keep him where he needed to be kept as far as the
administration of any kind of funds or things like
that. And I think Mr. Rutter also was the man that
brought Frank Huber here. Yes. Because if I'm not
mistaken, Mr. Rudder had said that he wanted the
best school man, if not in Texas, in America. And I
think that he's the one that came up with one prank
down at My 7th
grade band director, my 12th grade principal, and
my superintendent. He had also been in Austin when
Mr. Rudder had some Austin experiences, and I
think they were well acquainted there. Am I
correct also that on campus matters, Mr. Rudder
sometimes would ask Ed Cooper a question about
this or that? Oh, very much so. as far as Ed was his
assistant, and Ed, again, back to what you said
earlier that Jack Williams felt, Ed had a direct
pipeline to the former students. He knew so many of
them. And he had been to so many of their meetings
and whatnot that he was able to go out and test the
waters, I think, many times for the president. And
Ed was just a... He was... Everybody liked Ed, and
everybody would talk to Ed. And Ed spent a lot of
time going around the campus and visiting with
people. So he was an excellent one to have out
amongst the troops to get the sentiment of
whatever the subject might be. A goofy question
pops in my brain. Do you remember any old Army good
bull?